PROPOSAL.md, before:

# CS 126 Project Proposal: Music Visualization
## By Dipro Ray
A C++ application that loads stored music and creates visualizations about them, revealing technical aspects of the music in a very visually appealing manner.

## Description
This application is suited to the graphics capabilities of openFrameworks. I plan to use various 2d shapes and figures, graphs and maybe, 3d figures too. The application will provide a nice GUI allowing for customization in colors, shapes, different technical aspects of the sound being used. Here comes the necessity of the library I will be using, [Essentia](http://essentia.upf.edu/documentation/#). It allows for extracting desired technical qualities of the audio files in a variety of way, allowing different kinds of visualization and analysis to be done.

## Libraries
1. [openFrameworks](http://openframeworks.cc/): The framework used to build the music environment and GUIs.
2. [Essentia](http://essentia.upf.edu/documentation/#): To extract float values for different qualities of the music OR another major music analysis library for C++
3. ofXAddons: ofXGui, ofX 3D Graphics

## Rough Checkpoints
1. Week 1 Code Review: Implementation of 3 or 4 different types of visualizations with a simple GUI for controlling features of these visualizations.
2. Week 2 Code Review: Comparative Visualizations of different technical aspects of the audio files, using Essentia. Nicer GUI - more visually pleasing, sliders to control different values.
3. Slightly Ambitious Goal (to be worked on in the final week): Combine music visualizations with particle visualizations to simulate how particles would vibrate naturally in the presence of such music. Might use Box2D library here!


------------------------------------------------------
------------------------------------------------------
------------------------------------------------------
# Old Proposal
__I shall not be working on this project due to technical difficulties I have been facing in setting up the required libraries, such as Allegro. I spent quite a few hours in Office Hours trying to get it to work but there is some problem for Allegro on OS X, so I am not able to run it. As I am losing out on precious time for the project, I am choosing to not proceed with this project.__

# CS 126 Project Proposal: Flappy Illini :large_orange_diamond: :baby_chick: :large_blue_diamond:
A C++ application remake of the iconic [Flappy Bird](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flappy_Bird)! :bird:

## Summary (or tl;dr)
__A C++ game of Flappy Bird, using [openFrameworks](http://openframeworks.cc/) and [ofBox2d](https://github.com/vanderlin/ofxBox2d) (and possibly, [Allegro](http://liballeg.org/)). The project will include special features beyond a basic Flappy Bird game such as: coin collection, level demarcations, game layout customizations, and hopefully [dynamic game difficulty balancing (DGB)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dynamic_game_difficulty_balancing) and split-screen multiplayer mode.__

## Description
The C++ application will be similar to Flappy Bird. 
There is a character, the bird, which has to be saved from hitting tubes as it "jumps" through the holes in these tubes. Attached below is a simple gif depiction of Flappy Bird.  
  
<p align="center"> 
<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/mchakravarty/lazy-lambda/master/images/LazyLambdaLoop.gif">
</p>
  
Implementing this basic Flappy Bird game will require thinking about:
1. **Superimposition of the tubes over the background layout.** I intend to let the background be "built" in the application, rather than an image.
2. **An endless building of the game environment.** I need to figure out how to randomly generate the tubes and the holes in them to ensure a game of reasonable difficulty. 
3. **Physics behind the jumps of the bird.** I have to figure out how to model these jumps as minor trajectories the bird is thrown into.
After implementing a basic Flappy Bird game, I intend to add additional features, which are described below.
4. **Implementing a simple, yet fun, GUI** for Welcome screen, Game Over screen, Paused screen with some fun features beyond the ordinary expectations from a game.

I intend to add quite a few additional features to the basic Flappy Bird game.

## Additional Features
1. **Game Layout Elements Customization**: Customization of background layout, colors of background and tubes, bird etc.
2. **Level Demarcations**: Demarcate environment into levels, and adjust scores accoordingly.
3. **Collection of Coins, Jackpots, Mystery Boxes, Power Packs**: Common game elements which can be incorporated into Flappy Bird. Power packs - allowing the user to fly through a certain number of tubes automatically - will require some thinking as to how the system would display the animation for passing through tubes with holes at random heights.
4. **Split-screen Mulitplayer mode**: Splitting the window into half, vertically or horizontally, to allow two (or possibly, more) players to play the game simultaneously.
5. **[Dynamic Game Difficulty Balancing (DGB)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dynamic_game_difficulty_balancing)**: This one of the more complex extra features I would like to add, and it would be cool if it can be pulled off. DGB tries to adapt the game environment to the player's proficiency. Doing so would require a mathematical approach to determining what variation in the heights of adjacent tube holes corresponds to what degree of difficulty. A way I thought I could tune my game to increase in difficulty is to model a "cost" function which on minimizing increases difficulty by a bit, and use past tube hole heights data to perform stochastic gradient descent on the coefficients of the function to generate an increasingly difficult game environment. As is evident, I am trying to apply the notion of [stochastic gradient descent](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stochastic_gradient_descent) from machine learning here. In case this turns out to be very complex or very time consuming, I hope to figure out a more intuitive/practical way or increasing game difficulty.

## Libraries Being Used
1. [openFrameworks](http://openframeworks.cc/): The framework used to build the game environment and GUIs.
2. [ofBox2d](https://github.com/vanderlin/ofxBox2d): An openFrameworks add-on that can help simulate the physics of the bird jumping.
3. [Allegro](http://liballeg.org/): A game-engine library for C++. I am not yet sure if I will use this, but it is potentially very useful in making game environment customizations easy (primarily because of it being able to parse TMX files generated by [Map Editor](http://www.mapeditor.org/)).
4. An ML library for C++ to perform Stochastic Gradient Descent. I am still looking into any alternative lightweight libraries (game data shouldn't be too large), but for now, [mlpack](https://github.com/mlpack/mlpack) is what I plane to use for DGB.

My development environment will be [Xcode](https://developer.apple.com/xcode/).

## Rough (Ideal) Plan / Checkpoints for the next 4 Weeks
1. **Week 1: Running Prototype of a basic Flappy Bird game, Detailed Plan for Next Phase**
    * Get a Flappy Bird game up and running as an openFrameworks application.
    * Plan the next phase - adding GUIs, improving game engine code, etc.
2. **Week 2: Running, Visually Pleasing Prototype of the game mentioned in Decription**
3. **Week 3: Tweaking Code for Layout Customizations, and Adding Code for non-trivial, but non-difficult, additional features**
4. **[Final] Week 4: Achieve DGB. Ensure extensive documentation and project file structures. Polish any rough game details.**

## Relevant Personal Background
1. Significant programming experience in C++ (approx. 2 years)
2. Knowledge of stochastic gradient descent and popular ML techniques (courtesy of [CS 361](https://courses.engr.illinois.edu/cs361/sp2018/))

Commit message:

Updated new proposal with technical goals

PROPOSAL.md, after:

# CS 126 Project Proposal: Music Visualization
## By Dipro Ray
A C++ application that loads stored music and creates visualizations about them, revealing technical aspects of the music in a very visually appealing manner.

## Description
This application is suited to the graphics capabilities of openFrameworks. I plan to use various 2d shapes and figures, graphs and maybe, 3d figures too. The application will provide a nice GUI allowing for customization in colors, shapes, different technical aspects of the sound being used. Here comes the necessity of the library I will be using, [Essentia](http://essentia.upf.edu/documentation/#) (I may use the openFrameworks add-on for Essentia instead of the library itself). It allows for extracting desired technical qualities (Perlin noise, time waveform, beats rate) of the audio files in a variety of way, allowing different kinds of visualization and analysis to be done.

## Libraries
1. [openFrameworks](http://openframeworks.cc/): The framework used to build the music environment and GUIs.
2. [Essentia](http://essentia.upf.edu/documentation/#): To extract float values for different qualities of the music OR another major music analysis library for C++
3. ofXAddons: ofXGui, ofX 3D Graphics

## Expected Features
1. A few visualizations (graph-based, textures etc.) based on the Perlin Noise of the music.
2. A visual display of the input and output signals of the Fast Fourier Transform on audio files in real-time (audio to be passed in through the microphone). This will make use of the ofxFFT addon of openFrameworks.
3. A nice GUI for using all visualization and analysis features as a stand-alone application.
4. (Hopefully) 3D visualizations of various aspects of the sound.
5. (Ambitious Goal) Combine music visualizations with particle visualizations to simulate how particles would vibrate naturally in the presence of such music.

## Rough Checkpoints
1. Week 1 Code Review: Implementation of 3 or 4 different types of visualizations with a simple GUI for controlling features of these visualizations.
2. Week 2 Code Review: Comparative Visualizations of different technical aspects of the audio files, using Essentia. Nicer GUI - more visually pleasing, sliders to control different values.
3. Slightly Ambitious Goal (to be worked on in the final week): Combine music visualizations with particle visualizations to simulate how particles would vibrate naturally in the presence of such music. Might use Box2D library here!


------------------------------------------------------
------------------------------------------------------
------------------------------------------------------
# Old Proposal
__I shall not be working on this project due to technical difficulties I have been facing in setting up the required libraries, such as Allegro. I spent quite a few hours in Office Hours trying to get it to work but there is some problem for Allegro on OS X, so I am not able to run it. As I am losing out on precious time for the project, I am choosing to not proceed with this project.__

# CS 126 Project Proposal: Flappy Illini :large_orange_diamond: :baby_chick: :large_blue_diamond:
A C++ application remake of the iconic [Flappy Bird](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flappy_Bird)! :bird:

## Summary (or tl;dr)
__A C++ game of Flappy Bird, using [openFrameworks](http://openframeworks.cc/) and [ofBox2d](https://github.com/vanderlin/ofxBox2d) (and possibly, [Allegro](http://liballeg.org/)). The project will include special features beyond a basic Flappy Bird game such as: coin collection, level demarcations, game layout customizations, and hopefully [dynamic game difficulty balancing (DGB)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dynamic_game_difficulty_balancing) and split-screen multiplayer mode.__

## Description
The C++ application will be similar to Flappy Bird. 
There is a character, the bird, which has to be saved from hitting tubes as it "jumps" through the holes in these tubes. Attached below is a simple gif depiction of Flappy Bird.  
  
<p align="center"> 
<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/mchakravarty/lazy-lambda/master/images/LazyLambdaLoop.gif">
</p>
  
Implementing this basic Flappy Bird game will require thinking about:
1. **Superimposition of the tubes over the background layout.** I intend to let the background be "built" in the application, rather than an image.
2. **An endless building of the game environment.** I need to figure out how to randomly generate the tubes and the holes in them to ensure a game of reasonable difficulty. 
3. **Physics behind the jumps of the bird.** I have to figure out how to model these jumps as minor trajectories the bird is thrown into.
After implementing a basic Flappy Bird game, I intend to add additional features, which are described below.
4. **Implementing a simple, yet fun, GUI** for Welcome screen, Game Over screen, Paused screen with some fun features beyond the ordinary expectations from a game.

I intend to add quite a few additional features to the basic Flappy Bird game.

## Additional Features
1. **Game Layout Elements Customization**: Customization of background layout, colors of background and tubes, bird etc.
2. **Level Demarcations**: Demarcate environment into levels, and adjust scores accoordingly.
3. **Collection of Coins, Jackpots, Mystery Boxes, Power Packs**: Common game elements which can be incorporated into Flappy Bird. Power packs - allowing the user to fly through a certain number of tubes automatically - will require some thinking as to how the system would display the animation for passing through tubes with holes at random heights.
4. **Split-screen Mulitplayer mode**: Splitting the window into half, vertically or horizontally, to allow two (or possibly, more) players to play the game simultaneously.
5. **[Dynamic Game Difficulty Balancing (DGB)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dynamic_game_difficulty_balancing)**: This one of the more complex extra features I would like to add, and it would be cool if it can be pulled off. DGB tries to adapt the game environment to the player's proficiency. Doing so would require a mathematical approach to determining what variation in the heights of adjacent tube holes corresponds to what degree of difficulty. A way I thought I could tune my game to increase in difficulty is to model a "cost" function which on minimizing increases difficulty by a bit, and use past tube hole heights data to perform stochastic gradient descent on the coefficients of the function to generate an increasingly difficult game environment. As is evident, I am trying to apply the notion of [stochastic gradient descent](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stochastic_gradient_descent) from machine learning here. In case this turns out to be very complex or very time consuming, I hope to figure out a more intuitive/practical way or increasing game difficulty.

## Libraries Being Used
1. [openFrameworks](http://openframeworks.cc/): The framework used to build the game environment and GUIs.
2. [ofBox2d](https://github.com/vanderlin/ofxBox2d): An openFrameworks add-on that can help simulate the physics of the bird jumping.
3. [Allegro](http://liballeg.org/): A game-engine library for C++. I am not yet sure if I will use this, but it is potentially very useful in making game environment customizations easy (primarily because of it being able to parse TMX files generated by [Map Editor](http://www.mapeditor.org/)).
4. An ML library for C++ to perform Stochastic Gradient Descent. I am still looking into any alternative lightweight libraries (game data shouldn't be too large), but for now, [mlpack](https://github.com/mlpack/mlpack) is what I plane to use for DGB.

My development environment will be [Xcode](https://developer.apple.com/xcode/).

## Rough (Ideal) Plan / Checkpoints for the next 4 Weeks
1. **Week 1: Running Prototype of a basic Flappy Bird game, Detailed Plan for Next Phase**
    * Get a Flappy Bird game up and running as an openFrameworks application.
    * Plan the next phase - adding GUIs, improving game engine code, etc.
2. **Week 2: Running, Visually Pleasing Prototype of the game mentioned in Decription**
3. **Week 3: Tweaking Code for Layout Customizations, and Adding Code for non-trivial, but non-difficult, additional features**
4. **[Final] Week 4: Achieve DGB. Ensure extensive documentation and project file structures. Polish any rough game details.**

## Relevant Personal Background
1. Significant programming experience in C++ (approx. 2 years)
2. Knowledge of stochastic gradient descent and popular ML techniques (courtesy of [CS 361](https://courses.engr.illinois.edu/cs361/sp2018/))
